Professional Engineering and EGBC:

Professionalism:
	Attitudes and behaviours: be a good person
	EGBC: "fairness, courtesy and good faith" "truth, honesty and trustworthiness and safeguard human life and welfare and the environment"
	Companies: code of conduct, not universal (ex: confidentiality, conflict of interests)
Roles and Responsibilities:
	Generally: 
		Professionalism
		EGBC Code of Ethics
	Specific: 
		Protection of the Public: minimize likelihood and impact
		Serving the Public Interests: benefit public in projects
	Others: 
		Not in Code (ex: volunteering)
	Competing Stakeholders Interests:
		Provide informed options for decision-makers
Professional Engineering:
	Building + acquiring knowledge
	Origins of professional engineering, 3 key developments:
		1. Printing press: spread knowledge
		2. Industrial rev: technology advances
		3. Organization and regulation
	In Canada:
		1920's: Provicial organizations (ex: EGBC) + laws (provincial)
		Engineers Canada: federal org
			Accreditation board: assess academics
			Qualification board: 
	In BC:
		1920: Engineering Profession's Act
		EGBC regulate by licensing P.Eng, self-regulate
	Regulated differently worldwide
		Self vs gov't regulated
EGBC:
	Council: 13 elected, 4 lay person appointed, faculty
	CEO and Registrar operate day to day
	Regulatory roles:
		Register people as P.Eng
		Spot check, investigate, discipline, enforcement
		Liason with Engineers Canada, foresters, architects, technologists, etc
	Other roles:
		Make Practice Guidelines, promote Organizational Quality Management
		Promotion, advocacy, seminars, etc
	Current changes:
		Mount Polley failure (oof)
		Mandatory continued prof dev, Superintendent of Professional Governance, etc etc
	Memberships:
		Becoming P.Eng:
			Citizen or PR, academics ok, 4 years experience, PPE, English
			Benefits: employment, practice (stamp), title + prestige, engagement
		EIT: have academics, working to 4 years exp, under P.Eng supervision
		Other memberships:
			Engineering Licensee, non practicing P.Eng, non-resident licensee, inter-association/national, provisional member
Iron Ring:
	Reminder: obligations, ethics, humility
	Isaacson's past advice (lol):
		1. Verify big picture
		2. Expect unexpected
		3. Don't be ruber stamp
		
Conflicts of Interest

Conflict of Interest:
	Define: professional has professional duties vs special interests
		Professional duties: standards, confidentiality, impartial, fiduciary, 3rd parties affected
		Special interests: self-interest, family, group, emotional
	Avoid because:
		Damage career, employer, profession 
		Jail

Conflict of interest is not:
	Conflicting interests (professional interests come first in company time)
	Conflicting legitimate obligations (public vs employer)
	Ethical dilemma (personal morals vs professional duties)	
Types of Conflict of Interest:
		Actual (clear cut)
		Potential (series of events lead to)
		Apparent (looks like, but may not be) 
		
Mental process:
	Self interests = automatic: 
		Effortless, involuntary
		Latent bias
	Professional duties = controlled
	Conflict of interest = automatic vs controlled = inevitable
	
What to do:
	Avoid, disclose to all, recuse
	EGBC: avoid, and disclose to employer if can't avoid
	Disclosure:
		Doesn't elimiate COI: bias still exist
		Doesn't mitigate COI: client can't differenciate good and bad advice
		Does show unobjectivity more clearly

Thargard moral-psych

1. Introduction
	Agent has a responsibility to look after broader interests that are neglected  because  of  the  agent’s  own  interests
	
2. Conflict of Interest
	Subtle conflicts of interest may distort the judgments of decision makers, sometimes not obvious (ex: bribing) without their awareness of the distortion
	
3. Approaches to Moral Psych
	Approaches in this paper is based on research in affective neuroscience
	
5. Application to Conflicts of Interest
	Why are decisions that involve conflicts of interest so common?
		Because of pleasant social and professional contacts, the Waterloo executives had come to associate positive somatic markers with the MFP vice president and the deal he was proposing.
	Why are people so often unaware that they are acting immorally as the result of conflicts of interest?
		Decision makers who have acquired interests at odds with their official responsibilities have no way of knowing whether their decisions emanate from the biases they have acquired from personal interests instead of from good reasoning that takes their responsibilities into account.
	No reason to believe that the act of disclosing such interests would influence the unconscious processes of decision-making that allow personal biases to distort reasoning away from professional responsibilities. Indeed, the act of disclosure could even have the opposite effect, of giving the deciders and exaggerated confidence that they are acting morally and are therefore impervious to the effects of conflicts of interest.
	Gaining biases: The brain does not have the processing and storage capacity to acquire beliefs of no importance, so we tend to focus  belief  acquisition  on  topics  that  matter  to  us. 
	
7. Normative Issues
	